hey this is fresh towel locker on the TV
show Survivor contestants faced off in a
winner-take-all competition to try and
win 1 million dollars most of the
competitions were physical like hiking
many miles or diving underwater but one
of the challenges was mathematical it
involved 21 flags the contestants were
divided into two teams that would take
turns
removing flags each team has to remove
one two or three flags on a turn the
team that removed the final flag wins
the game mathematically one team can
always win this game the puzzle for you
is which team is it and what is that
team's winning strategy give this prom a
try and when you're ready keep watching
the video for the solution so what's the
winning strategy when they're 21 flags
it's not so easy to figure out
instead we consider the game by thinking
ahead and reasoning backward we try and
imagine what would happen if we start a
turn with a specific number of flags and
we would decide whether we can win or
lose the game on that turn so let's say
there's just one flag if you start out
with one flag you can obviously pick up
that flag and you will win the game for
sure this goes for if there are two
flags you are going to win the game and
if there are three flags you're going to
win the game with these number of flags
you can just pick them all up and you're
going to be the one that removes the
last flag but what happens if there are
four flags well you can pick up one two
or three flags on your turn if you pick
up one flag you leave three flags for
the other team and the other team is
going to pick up all three flags
if you pick up two flags you leave two
flags for the other team but they again
can pick up all of those flags if you
try and pick up three flags you still
leave one flag for the other team and
they can pick it up and win the game
what this means is if if there are four
flags in front of you no matter what you
do you are going to lose this game
you're going to leave a number of flags
that your opponent can pick up on the
next turn what would happen if there are
five flags in this case you could pick
up one flag and leave four flags for
your opponent now your opponent is
necessarily going to lose which means
you are necessarily going to win
similarly if there are six or seven
flags
you could pick those up and leave four
flags for your opponent this would mean
your opponent is going to lose so this
means six or seven flags is also a
winning number of flags what would
happen if there are eight Flags well in
this case if you try and pick up one two
or three flags no matter what you do
you're going to leave a winning number
of flags for your opponent this means
that if there are eight flags you are
necessarily going to lose the game if
your opponent plays correctly we can now
see a pattern in what we've developed if
the number of Flags is a multiple of
four you're going to lose the game if
your opponent plays perfectly so we can
continue this list and we can have the
number of flags for when you're going to
lose the game and the number of flags
for when you're going to win the game
you can notice that twenty-one is in the
numbers of flags for which you can win
the game so if the game starts out with
twenty-one flags that means the first
team that picks up flags can win this
game for sure by always picking up flags
and leaving a multiple of four for the
other team so the first team that picks
up should win this game
but let's consider what actually
happened on TV well compare the optimal
move to what the two teams could have
picked up the first move the first team
should have picked up one flag leaving
20 flags for the other team instead they
picked up two flags leaving 19 flags for
Team B so if Team B understood the
winning strategy they could now pick up
three flags which would leave 16 flags
for Team A instead team B also picked up
two flags and left 17 flags
this gives team a an opportunity to
redeem itself they can now pick up one
flag and be in a winning position what
they did instead is they picked up two
flags leaving 15 so now Team B if they
picked up to three flags they're going
to be able to leave twelve flags for
team a and they're gonna be able to win
the game
what did Team B do at this point they
made another mistake
they picked up one flag leaving 14 flags
for team a team a could pick up two
flags and then be again in a winning
position but they made another mistake
they only picked up one flag here and
they left 13 flags team B finally makes
a winning move here they pick up one
flag and they leave 12 flags so team B
is in position to win this game as long
as they play correctly the rest of the
way so team a at this point has no
choice they pick up some number of flags
if team be placed properly team B is
going to win the game so when there are
11 flags left team B should pick up
three flags to leave eight flags for
team a but team P messes up again here
they only pick up two flags which leaves
nine flags for Team a so team a could
redeem itself by picking up one flag and
leaving eight instead they make a big
mistake here and pick three flags which
leaves six flags for Team B
now what six flags remaining team B is
able to reason out the winning strategy
so you do correctly pick up two flags
here and leave four flags for Team a
this is actually shown on the TV show
that they are discussing that they
should leave four flags for the other
team at this point Team A realizes that
it cannot win the game so they
gracefully pick up three flags which
leaves one flag for Team B to pick up so
there were many mistakes in the way the
teams play it we shouldn't judge them
too harshly because they didn't have too
much time to figure this out but if you
find yourself in such a situation on the
game show you should always be able to
figure out the optimal move did you
figure out this problem thanks for
watching this video please subscribe to
my channel I make videos on math and
game theory you can catch me on my blog
mind your decisions which you can follow
on Facebook Google+ and patreon you can
catch me on social media at pressure
Locker and if you liked this video
please check out my books there links in
the video description